---
tags: []
layout: page
title: Coming Out Q&A
created: 1457494551
permalink: /coming-out
redirect-from: /node/234
---
I realize this is a complex topic, and people may have questions or be unsure
how to treat me, so I’ve tried to explain things in an interview-like format
that may answer some of the questions people have. I’m generally a pretty
private person, so there are many things I’m not comfortable sharing in a public
context like this, but please contact me directly if you have additional
questions about the way I’ve explained things.

_How should we address you?_

By my name, Mikayla! Please also use terms like “she/her/hers”, “Ms.” and
“sister/daughter”. For nicknames, “mhutch” or “hutch” are still fine.

Don’t worry, I won’t be upset if people slip up from time to time!

_Does this change who you are?_

No, I’m still the same person with the same strengths and weaknesses, likes and
dislikes, virtues and flaws. I may look a little different and have a different
name, but those are relatively superficial and are simply a clearer expression
of the person you already know.

_Why are you doing this?_

I was becoming increasingly unhappy repressing and hiding a part of myself. A
few years ago I decided to address this dissonance in my life. After
experimenting and figuring things out, gradually coming to terms with myself and
how I could be comfortable with other people, this is the path that makes the
most sense.

_Why did it take so long?_

I’ve always worried how other people see me, probably far too much. I’ve never
identified with the gender binary, and it’s only in recent years that the
concept of a gender spectrum has become generally accepted.

_This seems like a difficult step to take!_

Yes, I’ve had to worry about how my family and friends and even total strangers
will treat me. There are many places that make life extremely difficult for
people like me, and that I may now never be able to visit safely. Even the
administrative changes are very complex. This isn't something I’m doing lightly.

_How are you doing?_

Really well! I’m lucky to have very supportive friends and family, and to live
in a time when so many others have made the world a more accepting place. I’m
grateful for everything everyone has done and continues to do, and hope that I
can support others in similar situations.

_How should we describe you?_

I’m not a fan of labels, but I consider myself to be somewhere towards the
feminine side of the gender spectrum, and I’m most comfortable with identifying
as a woman. I am transgender or “trans”, and it’s not something I’m hiding, but
the adjective is a detail that should only be used when it’s relevant, for
example when talking about gender identity or my personal history.

_How should we refer to your past?_

Please be respectful and don’t bring up my previous name and gender unless
necessary for explanation or clarification. For example, if someone asks “Who’s
that in that photo?”, you could say “Oh that’s Mikayla, before she transitioned”
.

_Is this like [other person]?_

Maybe, maybe not. Every trans person has their own narrative and identity.
Please be respectful and do not assume that things I’ve said apply to others
that you meet, or that things you’ve heard from others apply to me.

_Will anything else change going forward?_

Life is change, and I’ll always be evolving as a person, figuring this out,
learning things and trying to improve my own life and that of others. In many
ways I’m not changing at all :)
