---
tags: [ mono, c#, c++, javascript, aspnetedit, gecko ]
layout: journal
title: It lives!
created: 1120780362
redirect_from:
- /node/81
- /journal/2005/07/07/it_lives
---
The inbound (Mono -> Gecko) C++ DOM function is working fine and I can recieve a
C# call in JavaScript; now I just need to pass it off to the actual function.

There was a bit of trouble initially as I couldn't obtain an nsIWebBrowser
pointer from  gtk_moz_embed_get_nsIWebBrowser. This turned out to be because the
Gecko# WebControl hadn't been shown yet (i.e. window.ShowAll()), but I didn't
figure this out as other functions like gtk_moz_embed_get_location worked
fine.<!--break-->

Here's Blagovest Dachev's XUL GUI demo hosted in my container, with a simple
C#->JS call demonstration. For anyone who hasn't seen the Mono [Summer of Code
page](http://www.mono-project.com/Summer2005), Blago's working on the Mozilla
half of this project.

![Screenshot of a function call](/files/images/MonoScreenshots/FunctionCall.png)

Shouldn't be hard now to get the outbound side working. I'll have to test how
long the JavaScript status messages can be, or I'll have to finish the outbound
C++ glue. Marshalling 'out' parameters isn't too easy, especially when I don't
want to place any artificial limits on the size of the data that can be passed
around, so I'll return the arguments from the function as a string pointer
return value. I don't expect the names of the callee and callback functions to
be more than a few hundred characters in the extreme case, so they should be
able to be sent in the JavaScript status message.

However, splitting the call in two parts like this could have consequences;
there's no telling what multithreading could do to concurrency. I guess some
kind of unique identifier is in order.

I also need to finish all of the error and exception handling at some point,
though it seems robust enough at the moment.
